---
layout: default
title: Four Key Economic Growth Pillars  
date: 2013-01-09 00:00:01
category: Economic Growth
---

Four Key Economic Growth Pillars

The Importance of the Four Economic Pillars

To provide a broader picture for Detroit’s economic growth, the Framework relies on three sets of 20-year scenarios for the city’s employment. The first scenario directly borrows SEMCOG’s projections for Detroit, resulting in total city job growth of 1.5% over 20 years. The second scenario applies SEMCOG’s growth rates for Wayne County to Detroit, resulting in about 4% job growth over the period. The third scenario applies projected U.S. growth rates to the city of Detroit, resulting in almost 20% job growth over 20 years, the equivalent of about 50,000 new jobs in the city. Just as important, in this scenario, job growth in the city keeps pace with that in the region and contributes to a more vibrant regional economy.

**Local entrepreneurship**. This broad category includes a range of potential transformative agendas including formalizing the informal sector; improving the economic lives of the self-employed by increasing their net wages and/or helping them to transition from self-employed to small business owner; and aiding in business creation and expansion for Detroit’s entrepreneurs and would- be entrepreneurs. One of the largest opportunities for entrepreneurs is in Local Business Services, i.e., “Local B2B,” a broad category that captures the opportunity for small- and mid-sized local businesses to provide goods and services to other, usually larger businesses. Local B2B firms perform professional and support services like accounting, printing, and employee recruiting; local logistical services like short-haul trucking and courier services; and facilities management functions including security, janitorial, and landscaping services. Local B2B companies can be successful at many scales, including sole proprietorships and very small companies. There is a tremendous opportunity in this cluster today—Detroit currently has a Local B2B “gap” of about 10,000 jobs that could be supported by existing activity— and the cluster is expected to grow all across the United States in the next decade.

**Eduation and Medical**, also known as “Eds and Meds” or the “anchor institutions”, includes hospitals, health clinics, and health-related manufacturing like medical devices, as well as universities, community colleges, and some research organizations. Together, these organizations employ 50,000 people in Detroit, with concentrations of activity in the Midtown area and in the northwest around McNichols Road. In the city of Detroit, hospitals make up approximately 60% of the employment in Eds and Meds. Henry Ford Hospital is the largest with more than 10,000 employees. Detroit’s colleges, universities, and professional schools employ over 8,000 while educating 65,000 people per year. In addition, many of Michigan’s major universities now have Detroit offices or programs. Health-related organizations like home health care services and outpatient clinics also create large numbers of jobs.

**Industrial** includes those clusters in which processing, assembly, manufacturing, repair, or distribution of physical goods is a central activity. A core set of industrial clusters is thought to drive to Detroit’s current and future economy: automotive; construction/demolition/engineering/repurposing (CDER); food; metals and machinery; and transportation, distribution, and logistics (TDL). The physical transformation of the city will spur significant job and business growth in the CDER cluster and create additional opportunity in the food cluster as more land becomes available for productive use. Together, companies in these clusters employ 27,000 people in industrial activity in the city and thousands more in non-industrial positions. Many jobs in the industrial clusters do not require high levels of formal education but do pay above-average wages. There are three primary industrial areas—Dequindre/ Eastern Market, Mt. Elliott, and Southwest—and multiple secondary industrial areas.

**Digital/Creative** includes companies in Information Technology (IT) but more broadly, companies that use web-based technologies and platforms to deliver service. The Digital clusters are centered around a few large downtown companies that specialize in IT outsourcing for large corporate clients (GalaxE, Strategic Staffing Solutions, VisionIT) but also Quicken, a mortgage lending company that revolutionized the use of on-line platforms in consumer lending; and Crain Communications, which makes broad use of digital media. The downtown New Economy cluster is part of a larger regional cluster that includes the IT divisions of global companies like General Motors and General Electric. Although still small relative to its potential, Detroit has one of the fastest-growing IT clusters in the country and is a key reason why the Detroit metro area led the United States in tech-related job growth in 2010. Detroit’s creative cluster, which specializes in areas like design, advertising, and talent management, can be found in every part of the city but is most highly concentrated along the so-called Creative Corridor and in Northwest around McNichols Road.

A.1 Align cluster strategies with the strategic framework

The city and regional economies are loosely organized into clusters with strong, but not always coordinated, local and regional intermediaries in the education, medical, creative, digital and food clusters; as well as some coordination of the traditional industrial clusters. This diverse set of organizations should create new strategies, or update existing ones, to reflect the priorities and actions in the Detroit Strategic Framework, which will the space for cooperation within and across clusters on common issues like workforce training, transportation, and security. Cluster organization and strategy development are perhaps the key mechanism for identifying areas of cooperation and investment that mutually benefit the city and regional economies and create strong and durable linkages between city and regional stakeholders.

Given the current citywide shortage of available, turnkey, low-cost space, each cluster strategy should include a real estate component that identifies real estate options, including shared-space options, for cluster companies and the self- employed. In addition, each cluster strategy should identify a portfolio of capital options for funding necessary real estate investments and business development and growth. In short, cluster leaders should look to cooperate with traditional and non-traditional capital sources to align resources with growth clusters and activities. Finally, each cluster strategy should outline a comprehensive approach for inclusion that ensures low-income and minority populations participate in and benefit from cluster growth.

A.2 Establish collaboration with labor market intermediaries in each economic cluster

The profound changes in city and regional labor markets have been accompanied by a change in the workforce infrastructure and the role of various intermediaries. One of the key changes is the growing importance of temp agencies in identifying and placing potential workers. Temp agencies’ role in placing workers in manufacturing and technology-related firms has expanded greatly in Detroit and nationally. Today, employers utilize temp agencies to screen for new hires that produce value in a short window of time. As such, cluster leaders should coordinate and create linkages between labor market intermediaries and the private sector in order to develop a Detroit labor pool that can produce short- and long-term value for companies. Detroit residents’ placement into jobs will be enhanced through tighter linkages between temp agencies and traditional training intermediaries, and between the large suburban temp agencies looking for workers and the city residents looking for jobs.